README.md, before:

# Certificate Management System

## 1. Overview

A comprehensive web-based system for tracking and managing SSL/TLS certificates across infrastructure components. Features include certificate/host/domain tracking, scanning, reporting, configuration, and backup.

---

## 2. Features

### Core Features

- **Certificate Tracking:** View, search, filter, and track SSL/TLS certificates, including status, associations, and history.
- **Host & Domain Tracking:** Inventory, types, IPs, DNS, and associations.
- **Infrastructure Mapping:** Visualize relationships between certificates, hosts, and domains.
- **Scanning & Monitoring:** Internal/external scans, SANs, scan history, alerts, and certificate chain validation.
- **Export & Reporting:** CSV/PDF exports, customizable templates, timeline/charts.
- **Configuration & Backup:** YAML-based config, web editor, multi-location, env overrides, automated/manual backup/restore.
- **User Interface:** Modern web UI with AG Grid, advanced filtering, responsive design.
- **Error Handling:** Custom exceptions, logging, and robust error management.
- **Testing:** Unit/integration tests, edge case coverage, test data for backup/restore.

### Planned & Upcoming Features

- **Data Synchronization:** Environment-specific scanning, database export/import, incremental updates, conflict resolution.
- **Advanced Validation:** Complete certificate chain validation, revocation checking, OCSP stapling.
- **Enhanced Search:** Full-text search, advanced filtering, bulk actions.
- **Multi-Instance Support:** Database locking, concurrent access, conflict resolution.
- **Security Enhancements:** Role-based access, audit logging, secret management.
- **Domain Management:** Registration/expiration tracking, ownership monitoring, wildcard support.
- **Data Resilience:** Locking, rollback, audit trail, versioning.
- **Scanning:** Scan certificates from associated bindings.

---

## 3. Installation

### Standard Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement.git
cd SRE-CertificateManagement
  # Optional: Create and activate a virtual environment for Python
  # python -m venv venv
  # venv\Scripts\activate

pip install -r requirements.txt
python run_custom.py

# or
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
pip install -r requirements.txt
python run_custom.py  # or: streamlit run run.py
```

App runs at <http://localhost:8501>.

### Offline Installation

- Download requirements on an online machine, copy to `requirements_offline`, then:

```bash
pip install --no-index --find-links requirements_offline -r requirements.txt
```

### Troubleshooting

- Change port in `run_custom.py` if needed.
- Check `streamlit_runner.log` for startup errors.

---

## 4. Usage Guide

- **Scanning Certificates:** Use the "Scan" sidebar, enter hostnames, start scan, view results/errors.
- **Viewing Certificates:** "Certificates" page for list/detail, SANs, associations.
- **Managing Hosts:** "Hosts" page with AG Grid, filtering, status indicators, details.
- **Dashboard:** Overview of certificates, expiring soon, timeline.

---

## 5. Configuration

- **Database:** `paths.database` (default: `data/certificates.db`)
- **Backups:** `paths.backups` (default: `data/backups`)
- **Scanning Profiles:** Internal/external rate limits, delays, domains.
- **Alerts:** Expiry warnings, failed scan thresholds, alert state file.
- **Environment Overrides:** Supported via environment variables.
- **Web Editor:** UI for settings management.

---

## 6. Architecture & Technology

- **Stack:** Python 3.x, Streamlit, SQLite, PyYAML, cryptography libraries.
- **Core Components:** Scanner, database layer (SQLAlchemy), web interface, settings manager, report generator.
- **Data Flow:** Scanning → Database → UI/Export/Alerts.
- **Control Flow:** User actions in UI trigger scans, updates, exports, and configuration changes.

---

## 7. Testing

- **Coverage:** Unit/integration tests for all core features.
- **How to Run:**

```bash
pytest
```

- **Edge Cases:** Backup/restore, error scenarios, validation.

---

## 8. Development & Contribution

- **Phases:** Core features → Integration → Advanced features → Enhancements.
- **How to Contribute:** Submit pull requests, follow code style guidelines, add/maintain tests and documentation.
- **Roadmap:** See "Planned & Upcoming Features" above.

---

## 9. Known Issues & Limitations

- Recursive domain deletion not fully implemented.
- WhoIS module may not respect offline mode.
- No pause/stop for ongoing scans.
- Some environment labeling and dashboard aggregation issues.

---

## 10. Appendix

- **Glossary:** (Add as needed)
- **References:** (Add as needed)
- **Links:** (Add as needed)

Commit message:

Enhance README with Additional Usage Information and Visual Aids
- Updated `README.md` to include detailed usage instructions for scanning certificates, viewing certificates, managing hosts, and dashboard features.
- Added new sections for Domain and History, providing users with an overview of domain information and previously scanned certificates.
- Included visual aids (screenshots) for each feature to enhance understanding and usability of the application.

These changes significantly improve the documentation clarity and user experience, making it easier for developers and users to navigate and utilize the infrastructure management system effectively.

README.md, after:

# Certificate Management System

## 1. Overview

A comprehensive web-based system for tracking and managing SSL/TLS certificates across infrastructure components. Features include certificate/host/domain tracking, scanning, reporting, configuration, and backup.

---

## 2. Features

### Core Features

- **Certificate Tracking:** View, search, filter, and track SSL/TLS certificates, including status, associations, and history.
- **Host & Domain Tracking:** Inventory, types, IPs, DNS, and associations.
- **Infrastructure Mapping:** Visualize relationships between certificates, hosts, and domains.
- **Scanning & Monitoring:** Internal/external scans, SANs, scan history, alerts, and certificate chain validation.
- **Export & Reporting:** CSV/PDF exports, customizable templates, timeline/charts.
- **Configuration & Backup:** YAML-based config, web editor, multi-location, env overrides, automated/manual backup/restore.
- **User Interface:** Modern web UI with AG Grid, advanced filtering, responsive design.
- **Error Handling:** Custom exceptions, logging, and robust error management.
- **Testing:** Unit/integration tests, edge case coverage, test data for backup/restore.

### Planned & Upcoming Features

- **Data Synchronization:** Environment-specific scanning, database export/import, incremental updates, conflict resolution.
- **Advanced Validation:** Complete certificate chain validation, revocation checking, OCSP stapling.
- **Enhanced Search:** Full-text search, advanced filtering, bulk actions.
- **Multi-Instance Support:** Database locking, concurrent access, conflict resolution.
- **Security Enhancements:** Role-based access, audit logging, secret management.
- **Domain Management:** Registration/expiration tracking, ownership monitoring, wildcard support.
- **Data Resilience:** Locking, rollback, audit trail, versioning.
- **Scanning:** Scan certificates from associated bindings.

---

## 3. Installation

### Standard Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement.git
cd SRE-CertificateManagement
  # Optional: Create and activate a virtual environment for Python
  # python -m venv venv
  # venv\Scripts\activate

pip install -r requirements.txt
python run_custom.py

# or
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
pip install -r requirements.txt
python run_custom.py  # or: streamlit run run.py
```

App runs at <http://localhost:8501>.

### Offline Installation

- Download requirements on an online machine, copy to `requirements_offline`, then:

```bash
pip install --no-index --find-links requirements_offline -r requirements.txt
```

### Troubleshooting

- Change port in `run_custom.py` if needed.
- Check `streamlit_runner.log` for startup errors.

---

## 4. Usage Guide

- **Scanning Certificates:** Use the "Scan" sidebar, enter hostnames, start scan, view results/errors.
  - Scan domains you want to track registrar and certificate Info.
  - ![Scan](https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement/images/Screenshot-Scanner.png "Scan")
- **Viewing Certificates:** "Certificates" page for list/detail, SANs, associations.
  - ![Certificate](https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement/images/Screenshot-Certificate.png "Certificate")
- **Managing Hosts:** "Hosts" page with AG Grid, filtering, status indicators, details.
  - ![Host](https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement/images/Screenshot-Host.png "Host")
- **Dashboard:** Overview of certificates, expiring soon, timeline.
  - ![Dashboard](https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement/images/Screenshot-Dashboard.png "Dashboard")
- **Domain:** Overview of Domain and DNS information
  - ![Domain](https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement/images/Screenshot-Domain.png "Domain")
- **History** Previosly scanned Certificates and scans
  - ![History](https://github.com/klhutchins1/SRE-CertificateManagement/images/Screenshot-History.png "History")
  
---

## 5. Configuration

- **Database:** `paths.database` (default: `data/certificates.db`)
- **Backups:** `paths.backups` (default: `data/backups`)
- **Scanning Profiles:** Internal/external rate limits, delays, domains.
- **Alerts:** Expiry warnings, failed scan thresholds, alert state file.
- **Environment Overrides:** Supported via environment variables.
- **Web Editor:** UI for settings management.

---

## 6. Architecture & Technology

- **Stack:** Python 3.x, Streamlit, SQLite, PyYAML, cryptography libraries.
- **Core Components:** Scanner, database layer (SQLAlchemy), web interface, settings manager, report generator.
- **Data Flow:** Scanning → Database → UI/Export/Alerts.
- **Control Flow:** User actions in UI trigger scans, updates, exports, and configuration changes.

---

## 7. Testing

- **Coverage:** Unit/integration tests for all core features.
- **How to Run:**

```bash
pytest
```

- **Edge Cases:** Backup/restore, error scenarios, validation.

---

## 8. Development & Contribution

- **Phases:** Core features → Integration → Advanced features → Enhancements.
- **How to Contribute:** Submit pull requests, follow code style guidelines, add/maintain tests and documentation.
- **Roadmap:** See "Planned & Upcoming Features" above.

---

## 9. Known Issues & Limitations

- Recursive domain deletion not fully implemented.
- WhoIS module may not respect offline mode.
- No pause/stop for ongoing scans.
- Some environment labeling and dashboard aggregation issues.

---

## 10. Appendix

- **Glossary:** (Add as needed)
- **References:** (Add as needed)
- **Links:** (Add as needed)
